So if you wanna share stateful logic
throughout your application using Hooks,
you can use the Provider Pattern.
And this is kind of a combination
between the context API and.
Well, you don't have to use Hooks but
we'll see later that that's
definitely an extra.
So with a Provider Pattern we can say or
for example we have like this site again
and we wanna have like a dark mode and
a light mode.
So all the components on that website need
to know, okay, what's the current theme,
it needs to get that data from somewhere.
Now usually, I was just gonna go here real
quick is what happens, is when we wanna
implement logic like this, we end up
with something called prop drilling.
For example, if we have that state in a
very high component like the app component
and the listings all the way down
the component tree need to know that.
We have to like pass it
as like props theme.
This is called prop drilling.
You've probably seen this before where
you just like pass a component props and
that component has a child component,
you have to pass props there,
which has a child component,
all that stuff.
Now this can be super difficult to work
with and it's bad for like readability.
You just don't really know where stuff
goes, where it comes from, all that stuff.
Now the contextAPI in React uses bit or
is a bit different.
So instead we can wrap the components that
actually need the data in something called
a Provider.
And these components if they
need to have that data or
that stateful data,
they can opt in to use that Context.
If they don't, that's fine.
Because another thing that we saw with
Prop drilling is every time the state
changes, I'm just going to
scroll up a bit in app,
all the components re-render, even the
components that don't care about the data.
This is of course,
something that we want to avoid.
But sometimes it's pretty
hard to avoid that,
especially when many components care about
the data like further down the tree, but
tha like stateful logic
comes from higher up.
Yeah, so with the Provider Pattern, we can
wrap the components that care about it or
at least the parent most components that
has all the children to care about it in
a Provider.
And this Provider provides a React
context which is essentially
a component like a stateful
components that other components
within the Provider can opt
in to consume that data.
So we have like a provider and
we have consumers.
For example,
here we have the ThemeContext.
This is just the kinda based on
the example that we saw earlier.
So for example, now we have like
state lights by default, but
we also have like a theme and then set it.
Now the landing page can be wrapped in
the Provider because the components within
the landing page care about this data.
Some refer to them, maybe not TopNav
directly, maybe not main directly, but
somewhere down there.
They care about this data.
Now in this case TopNav
does care about it.
It's a Consumer.
So here we are against the render prop.
So it gets the theme component that we
passed here as a value from the Provider.
So that is essentially like that Context.
So they can consume this Context and
based on the state changes that we make in
the Provider, we can either have
a background color of light or dark.
And then we can also have a toggle
that uses the setTheme state update.
So, even though we see that
Main itself doesn't care about,
like we don't have any bugs with Main but
maybe the toggle is within Main.
But we don't have to care, we don't have
to worry about the re-render of Main if
the Theme Provider update it,
because it doesn't directly consume it.
Only the companies that consume it
directly will update on a state update.
Yeah, this is kind of where the Hooks come
in because it's really nice to combine
this with React Hooks.
So for example, if we have a ThemeContext
which is just like stateful objects and
we have the Provider here which I like
to just create a direct like component.
For it you don't have to do that,
you can also just wrap it directly
in like this Provider here.
But I just like to export it as Provider.
So it's like the same everywhere.
And then we can also create a custom Hook
that's called like useTheme Context,
cuz one of the built in Hooks within
React is the useContext hook.
And this is the way that other components
can opt in to consume the values of
the Provider.
But this just makes it a bit
more clear like, okay,
this is just a useTheme Context hook.
So now for example,
the TopNav cares about the theme.
So instead of using like this component,
and then there's render prop,
which is fine, but it's,
I don't know, it's not too pretty.
We can also just use this Hook,
like use the Hook.
So anytime that theme updates,
it actually also just gets it
the same way that we saw before.
Same with Toggle, because it also
exposes that setTheme toggle.
Yeah, so this is a really
nice way to use Hooks, but
this time in like a stateful context.
So we're actually using it to
change state or to consume state.
Yeah, so
one thing just to keep in mind is that,
if your component doesn't necessarily
care about what the Provider context or
I guess here what the Context provides.
Just make sure that you don't accidentally
end up using it because that will
cause a re-render.
But yeah, so only the components
that actually should consume it,
which is pretty nice.
Yeah, and of course it's better for like
scalability because we don't run into that
render props issue where it's hard to
know where certain props come from,
it's just nicer.
It's way more readable in my opinion,
yeah.
We can see that here, so
we have another challenge.
So the application below
contains a listings component and
an input components.
So what we have here is we have this input
components and we're again using that
useListings Hook that we saw before,
in order to render the listings here,
I know it's really bad CSS but
to render the listings here.
However, we're also using this
components in the listings.
So what ends up happening and
I'm just going to open this in a new tab,
is that we're unnecessarily fetching the
listings twice, which you can I guess see.
Let me just reload this.
I don't know what container hard
reload is the way to go, right here.
Yeah, so you can see that it fetched it
twice cuz we're calling useListings twice
both in the inputs and
in the listings components.
So instead,
what I would like you to do is to create
a Provider that wraps both the input and
the listings and that consumes this or
that uses this useListings Hook.
But it makes sure that it just fetches
it once because it can pass it down or
it can provide it to these
consumers input and the listings.
So we don't accidentally
fetch it twice for no reason